# WebTitle{Thinking with constraints}

## StepHeader{ZZZ}

Here the trouble with cause and effect is that it is a story-telling mechanism, and the telling of a story depends on taking a personal point of view: it depends on a narrative structure. Such structures are great for explaining 'how something goes' to ourselves but have their limitations, and different story-tellers may choose a different cause. Philosophers have explored such problems down the ages, with Hume being a very significant inflexion point. You could borrow a metaphor from the internet, – often accounts in physics are not best structured as a set of 'if this then that' because this relies on many un-explicated necessary conditions. As anyone who codes will realise, there are auxiliary assumptions behind the correct functioning of a piece of code.

To put it another way, any assertion of cause relies on a host of ceteris paribus conditions, which are often unexamined. Physics has developed to be more concerned with the "how" and not with the "why", so with stating correlations. The relationship a=F/m is of this kind: there is no arrow of time, no before and after, hidden in the assertion of equality. It is not, in short, a causal relationship, at least in the way that story-tellers, and perhaps, therefore, any natural language-users want to use cause and effect. Instead, it is a constraint relationship, describing a possibility space. It and many other relationships in physics have this in common with energy descriptions.

So to try to decide whether acceleration causes force or force causes acceleration is to conflate two different story-telling traditions( and why does no one speak up for mass?).

Similarly, for I=V/R. Maybe it's worth thinking about why no one even thinks about launching a discussion about cause and effect for the relationship density = mass/volume.

Most relationships in elementary physics are like this, comparing the values of physical quantities before a change with those afterwards and in other words, constraining the possible values between a pair of snapshots.

(These are different from accumulation relationships: the argument for preferring to focus on accumulation relationships in introductory kinematics appears in IRE05.)

These constraint relationships describe possibilities and so also impossibilities. Given one set of physical values, many other combinations of values are ruled out. It is a way of capturing and expressing the regularities in the world. Counterfactual arguments provide ways of imagining a world in which such regularities either did not exist or had yet to be discovered.

These kinds of accounts in the sciences are expressed with constraint relationships. They are not linear path narratives, a series of 'and next' statements: like a novelist's arrangement of events. These are a special kind of story, one that uses a particular type of thinking, not closely related to the causal. This thinking is wholistic and systemic, rather than atomistic and mechanical. The constraint shows possibilities and impossibilities and does not effect a particular outcome.
