# WebTitle{Making constraint models}

## StepHeader{Constraining and situations}


In this mode you can make models that represent situations rather than processes.

You are working in this quadrant of the modeling space:

URLGraphic{http://supportingphysicsteaching.net/SPTNCPoVGraphics/modelSpaceConstraint.svg}

### Assertions of equality

Let's start with a simple situation: comparing the impulse with the change in momentum. Here's a simple model which has the two quantities, and allows you to vary their values by dragging. But there are no rules in the imagined world: there are no rules connecting the two quantities:

URLCMR{http://supportingphysicsteaching.net/CMR/PoVFiles/PoVImpulseMometumUnconstrain.pde}

There are deep reasons for thinking that these two will always have identical values, that is both the numerical values and the units will be equal.

EqualityAssertion{WordFraction{number for impulse}{unit for impulse}}{WordFraction{number for change in momentum}{unit for change in momentum }}

That is, the two are constrained. Vary the impulse and you necessarily alter the change the momentum **and** vary the change in momentum and you necessarily alter the impulse. It is a genuine assertion of equality, not an assertion of assignment.

QuoteThis{EqualityAssertion{change in momentum}{impulse}}

Is identical in meaning to

QuoteThis{EqualityAssertion{impulse}{change in momentum}}

(There is evidence that this is not how children read and use the equals symbol, and that this distorts their understanding of the snapshot-like nature of situations: so the distinction is important in teaching physics).

Fortunately we can model this. Here is a constrained pair: they go up and down together. Drag either to vary the value and the other alters.

URLCMR{http://supportingphysicsteaching.net/CMR/PoVFiles/PoVImpulseMometumConstrain.pde}

You can present this as either an empirical discovery about the world, or an a priori truth: but whichever way you look at it, it's a rather significant and reliable relationship. So worth treating with respect—it was a hard won discovery.

This is a rather simple example, and there are many constrained relationships in elementary physics—perhaps most of them. Here is a categorisation:

URLGraphic{http://supportingphysicsteaching.net/SPTNCPoVGraphics/ConstraintRelationshipscommented.png}

### Equality with three terms

Let's start with an old chestnut.

FractionCBA{QuantitySymbol{a}}{QuantitySymbol{F}}{QuantitySymbol{m}}

But respecting the insights into the abuse of the equals sign, perhaps exacerbated by the use of QuoteThis{triangles}, let's represent these three quantities, at first in an model where there are no rules.

URLCMR{http://supportingphysicsteaching.net/CMR/PoVFiles/PoVFmaUnconstrain.pde}

You might not like the arrangement of the representations here—the force is not exerted on the mass—but it suited me to arrange it to match the relationship above. If you object strongly enough , adapt the code(EFTR).

Now you could add some rules into the imagined world, representing the discovery that _a_, _F_ and _m_ are bound together in a permanent relationship. Here the mass is kept constant, so that you can explore the effect of one independent variable on one dependent variable, again by dragging.

URLCMR{http://supportingphysicsteaching.net/CMR/PoVFiles/PoVFmaConstrain.pde}

If you' d like to change the quantity that is locked, adapt the code.

Again, whether an empirical discovery about the world, or an a priori truth: another rather significant and reliable relationship. It's not just a calculating device: it's a relationship between important quantities in the physics world.

### Exploring possibilities

Constraining is all about exploring what could or could not be the case in a situation. Some possibilities are ruled out, because of the rules that we've learnt to be reliable guides to action (the 'laws 'of physics). So you could make a bit of a fuss about this, exploring first the possible values when the quantities are unconstrained, and then the possibilities when the quantities are constrained. Here the model is for the constrained version, but you have only to comment out (prepend //), or delete the constraining relationship to strip out the rule.

URLCMR{http://supportingphysicsteaching.net/CMR/PoVFiles/PoVFaConstrainPossibility.pde}

So we got back to linear graphs, but by an insightful route.

But you might prefer something simpler, and more pre-packaged, in which case you could work with something like this:

URLCMR{http://supportingphysicsteaching.net/CMR/PoVFiles/PoVaFmPrepackaged.pde}

### Four terms, and compensation

Constraints apply to many different relationships, not just to two- and three-term relationships: some you'd expect to come across appear in the categorisation above.

Compensated circuits, as here:

FrameNugget{Ee03TAnugget01}

and transformers are two applications where you'd want to model something like:

ProductABCD{SymbolSub{I}{1}}{SymbolSub{V}{1}}{SymbolSub{I}{2}}{SymbolSub{V}{2}}

So create the quantities and then constrain them, to give a model:

URLCMR{http://supportingphysicsteaching.net/CMR/PoVFiles/PoVVIVICompensate.pde}

Here you can drag both currents to set the values, but neither pd. That allows you to have one independent and one dependent variable. To change these, grab the code and alter the model.

### Back to SPT

This idea of constraint relationships has been in SPT for a while, and, for those of you who prefer a more visual, but less flexible and more limited modeling environment, there has been a live system

URLLinkPN{The QWC tool}{http://supportingphysicsteaching.net/tools/QWC}

for a while.

### Even further back

If you prefer something more flexible, but still graphical, there is

URLLinkPN{VnR}{http://supportingphysicsteaching.net/tools/VnR/VnR2.0.zip}

(this one is a downloadable java app), although its metaphor does not do such a good job on constraining.

# A workable classroom taxonomy

Building a workable account of doing physics through building models with which we can reason and represent might seem more like botany or a social science than physics. A useful output is a workable taxonomy: workable because simple enough to be useable on the fly in the classroom. That means it'll probably not be comprehensive and incontestable: the taxonomy be a field guide, rather than a full and comprehensive account of doing physics. But that's not to say that it should not respect insights from the history and philosophy of physics, albeit re-wrought by didactical transposition.

Here is a simple grid, suitable for thinking about the range of models that might be simple enough to use in the classroom:

URLGraphic{http://supportingphysicsteaching.net/SPTNCPoVGraphics/modelSpace.svg}

SpacingLinebreak
The key element is to recognise some of the common moves that you make in constructing models, and to represent these in ways that make their commonality evident across many topics. This is a part of the project of introducing children to the culture of physics, of thinking like a physicist, so that they can know what that is like: both the pleasures and pains.

Many of these moves will be in generating the enabling descriptions that allow the more formal models to get a grip on the world. These are often the difficult foothills, where the path is not clear, and many fall by the wayside. Careful route planning across this terrain, by well prepared guides, can engender sufficient confidence for repeat transits, SpacingLinebreak necessarily associated with any effective problem-solving that involves modelling. So an effective approach to modelling starts a long time before writing the first (formal) model.

So what are these moves that we make, and how can we flag them up in ways that make the pervasiveness of the moves evident?

Noticing and recording are two groups of moves, but are perhaps too general as useful field guides. Although you might draw attention to the actions, after suitable priming.

'What do we choose to notice here?'
'What will it be useful to record here? And why?'

'Noticing' is a careful, but pre-physics-theoretic, activity, that results in qualitative or semi-quantitative results. So you can notice speeds and distances. You cannot notice accelerations, velocities, displacements (Forces could be either, depending where you are along the spectrum of refining the idea, because of their psychogenesis in human action).

Here is a workable framework:

- something that replaces my personal action ArrowRight a noticing
- something quantitative that you create through the action of an intra-subjective ontology ArrowRight a recording

In either case you can emphasise both selection and choice: depicting the lived-in world is a creative and purposeful activity. If there is a meta-message here, it's that the end goal, or purpose needs to be in view. You can guide children more easily, without many becoming dispirited in the foothills, if you share the reasons for the choice of path, and keep the end goal in sight, or at least in mind. It's an exercise in avoid ing both 'Are we nearly there yet?' And 'Why are we here?'. Pacing and generating a sense of purpose and progress are all: this can, and probably should, be done with a light touch.

More granular moves are therefore easier to stage, as progress is visible. Here are a few suggestions.

We can imagine making progress in the construction of a model by one of only four kinds of moves, effecting:

- a re-description of a situation or process
- a step through an analysis of a situation or process
- an evolution of a process
- an intervention in a situation

For classroom use, you could translate these to a simpler language, or even represent the moves graphically:

Redescriptions, represented with:

URLGraphic{http://supportingphysicsteaching.net/SPTRepresentations/RedescribeH.svg}

ArrowRight QuoteThis{see it another way}

Transitioning from one step to the next, represented with:

URLGraphic{http://supportingphysicsteaching.net/SPTRepresentations/NextStep.svg}

ArrowRight QuoteThis{next you can}

Self-willed time evolution represented with:
URLGraphic{http://supportingphysicsteaching.net/SPTRepresentations/EvolveR.svg}

ArrowRight QuoteThis{let it run on by itself}

An intervention, denoting a physical changes represented with:

URLGraphic{http://supportingphysicsteaching.net/SPTRepresentations/PhysicalR.svg}

ArrowRight QuoteThis{make a change}

The advantages of using a graphical language is that you can use it as a frame for the particular content, which is the approach taken in SPT. The focus can either be on the frame, or on the particular.

But the number of kinds of move, and the way these moves are represented, are choices for you to make. SPT gives one worked through example. What you should not do, I think, is leave the whole process of constructing models as an amorphous set of hidden moves, not explicitly identified and so made available for reflection. It's hard to see how a cultured view of a citizens education in thinking like a physicist could not contain these structuring elements. Tacit knowledge is not enough for a citizen's education in physics.
