# WebTitle{Thinking with constraints}

## StepHeader{Constraints an essential precursor}

Here the trouble with cause and effect is that it is a story-telling mechanism, and the telling of a story depends on taking a personal point of view: it depends on a narrative structure. Such structures are great for explaining 'how something goes' to ourselves but have their limitations, and different story-tellers may choose a different cause. Philosophers have explored such problems down the ages, with Hume being a very significant inflexion point. You could borrow a metaphor from the internet, – often accounts in physics are not best structured as a set of 'if this then that' because this relies on many un-explicated necessary conditions. As anyone who codes will realise, there are auxiliary assumptions behind the correct functioning of a piece of code.

To put it another way, any assertion of cause relies on a host of ceteris paribus conditions, which are often unexamined. Physics has developed to be more concerned with the "how" and not with the "why", so with stating correlations. The relationship a=F/m is of this kind: there is no arrow of time, no before and after, hidden in the assertion of equality. It is not, in short, a causal relationship, at least in the way that story-tellers, and perhaps, therefore, any natural language-users want to use cause and effect. Instead, it is a constraint relationship, describing a possibility space. It and many other relationships in physics have this in common with energy descriptions.

### InsertGraphic{TPTeConstraintPID}{500}{450}

So to try to decide whether acceleration causes force or force causes acceleration is to conflate two different story-telling traditions( and why does no one speak up for mass?).

### InsertGraphic{TPTeaFmConstraintPID}{800}{400}

Similarly, for I=V/R. Maybe it's worth thinking about why no one even thinks about launching a discussion about cause and effect for the relationship density = mass/volume.

Most relationships in elementary physics are like this, comparing the values of physical quantities before a change with those afterwards and in other words, constraining the possible values between a pair of snapshots.

### InsertGraphic{TpTexvtConstrainExplainDIP}{800}{500}

(These are different from accumulation relationships: there are good arguments for preferring to focus on accumulation relationships in introductory kinematics)
