# WebTitle{Light cones for reasoning about space and time}

A major issue is to figure out a model of space and time and how this has changed from Newton to Einstein.

The poster will sketch out an approach to a two-week long teaching sequence to illuminate some of the central insights of Special and General Relativity based on reasoning with light cones. Light cones will be developed as a representation based on the two postulates of Special Relativity and then used to illustrate the slower ticking of clocks in a gravitational field based on physical evidence rather than on the metric(judged too complex derive from Einstein's field equations). The aim is to illuminate and reify rather than to prove – much like current approaches to Newtonian equations.

For Einstein there are a multiplicity of local witnesses only. There is no global witness to who we can appeal for a privileged point of view. The model of space and time instructs one witness in the procedures to be followed to reconstruct an accurate picture of what another witness will view. These transformations are more complex than the Galilean, but the principle is the same - this is the game that we’re playing. It seems essential to establish this epistemological understanding, which is best expressed using a local, rather than global geometry. In characterising the transformations, which are more commonly known as the metric, we should follow Einstein’s lead and focus firmly on time. This is not simple and some of the issues in representing duration will surface as a part of thinking about designing the sequence.

The key to the metric is time, determined by the dual postulates of the universal speed and the universality of physics.

From this simple start we might hope to build a didactical path that enables access to reasoning about all or some of the following, within the alllocated time-frame: natural motion; free fall; parabolic motion in uniform gravitational fields; satellite motion in radial fields; black holes; gravitational waves. Just how far teachers and children get will depend on the affordances available before explicitly starting to work on Einstein’s approaches.

[[Issues to illuminate]]
[[Space and time]]
[[Representation in Relativity]]
[[GR revisited, post Penrose]]
[[Reasoning]]
[[Preparatory work]]
[[Teaching Phrases]]
