WebTitle{Sounds and vibrating sources(Challenge)}

StepHeader{Vibration}

WrongTrack{If you hit a cymbal it vibrates to make the sound. If you drop a spoon on the kitchen table it just makes a noise.}

RightLines{All sounds are produced by vibrations. If you drop a spoon on the table, the sound you hear comes from the vibrations that are set up in the table and spoon.}

StepHeader{Teaching and learning about vibrations}

ThinkHeader{Thinking about the learning}

The challenge here is for pupils to come to appreciate that all sounds are generated by the vibration of a source.

In some situations the vibrating object is obvious; in others it is less so. Where the vibration is less obvious, pupils tend to revert to ad-hoc explanations for the generation of the sound, often focusing on human action. For example, QuoteThis{The hammer makes the bang because you hit the wood hard with it.} The learning challenge for pupils is to develop the general idea that all sounds are produced by vibrations.

ThinkHeader{Thinking about the teaching}

In your teaching it is worth identifying where the sound is coming from each time you consider a new sound-making context. Take the time to chase down what it is that is vibrating to act as the source of the sound.

A teaching colleague entertains her classes each year with the invitation:

TeacherSpeak{Let's play spot the vibration!}

She uses a range of examples in class:
 
ListInformation
- In a reed instrument (clarinet, saxophone, oboe): the reed vibrates, setting all of the air in the instrument tube vibrating.
- In a stringed instrument: the strings are first set into vibration, by either bowing or plucking, then air is set in motion in the box behind the strings.
- In a flute or recorder: the mouthpiece is shaped so that the air striking one edge of it is set into vibration. This small vibration sets up a larger vibration of the air in the instrument tube.
- When two stones are clinked together: it is the stones that vibrate, changing shape as they do so, much like the surface of a drum.
ListInformationEnd

